[RELENG-7422] 📝 Add documentation (#42)
scality/gh-actions-exporter: docs/metrics-analysis-prometheus/collected-reported-metrics.md

# Collected and reported metrics

The idea behind this repository is to gather as much information as
possible from the requests sent by GitHub via the Webhook.

> 

Reviewer: Already mentioned in the docs/index.md

In first place, it is important to differentiate the `workflow_run`

> and the `workflow_job` API requests.

Reviewer: API or webhook events?

The `workflow_run` request is triggered when a workflow run is `requested`,

> `in_progress`, or `completed`.

Reviewer: how about cancelled and skipped? Should it be mentioned?

Author: Done, I also added other events for `workflow_job`

project for workflow runs:

The number of workflow rebuilds: `github_actions_workflow_rebuild_count`.

The duration of a workflow in seconds: `github_actions_workflow_duration_seconds`.

Count the number of workflows for each state:

- `github_actions_workflow_failure_count`
- `github_actions_workflow_success_count`
- `github_actions_workflow_cancelled_count`
- `github_actions_workflow_inprogress_count`
- `github_actions_workflow_total_count`

## Workflow job

Here are the different metrics collected by the GitHub Actions
Exporter project for workflows and jobs.

The duration of a job in seconds: `github_actions_job_duration_seconds`.

Time between when a job is requested and started: `github_actions_job_start_duration_seconds`.

Count the number of jobs for each states:

- `github_actions_job_failure_count`
- `github_actions_job_success_count`
- `github_actions_job_cancelled_count`
- `github_actions_job_inprogress_count`
- `github_actions_job_queued_count`
- `github_actions_job_total_count`

## Cost metric

This is the last metric we collect, and it is one of the most important
ones. It allows us to determine the cost of our CI runs.

> ### The formula to calculate the cost over a period of time

Reviewer: Shorter title add the remain info in the section.

Author: New version 
```
### Formula

Here is the formula to calculate the cost over a period of time:
```

To calculate this metric, we use the following formula:

```bash
cost = duration (per second) / 60 * cost (per minute)
```

### How do we find the cost per minute?

#### GitHub

As for GitHub, it is quite simple. They provide us with a fixed value, and

> the price never varies. To give an example, for `ubuntu-latest`, we have a cost

Reviewer: Add info and link to larger github hosted runners pricing.

Author: Done

of 0.008$/min, that's it. Easy!

#### Self-Hosted

When it comes to the cost of self-hosted runners, it's a bit more complicated.

To calculate the costs of self-hosted runners, we can play the game of
calculating for the main ones, namely AWS and Google Cloud Provider (GCP).

The cost can be found based on the machine type in the Management Console
for AWS (when creating an EC2 instance) and on the
[Google Cloud website](https://cloud.google.com/compute/vm-instance-pricing)
for GCP.

> Unfortunately, these values are not accurate as they lack several elements

Reviewer: They are accurate, there's just more to it.

Author: Done

such as bandwidth or storage. As for storage costs, they can be found in
the same places where the machine type cost is available. However, it is
not possible to determine the bandwidth cost directly.

To overcome this, we had to devise a workaround. We didn't necessarily
need an exact cost for CI but rather a value close to reality (+/- 5%)
for data visualization purposes.

We analyzed previous invoices and calculated the additional cost generated
by bandwidth, which amounted to approximately 30% for each month.

> Consequently, we were able to approximate the cost using the following formula:

Reviewer: You're telling a story instead of documenting stuff, It's ok to write this in a blog post but documentation should get straight to the point. 

With the content you have here, define bullet points with the information that needs to be retrieved along with a short explanation.

Author: I tried something, tell me if it's better

```bash
cost = (cost_per_flavor + cost_per_storage) * 130 / 100
```

> _Good news, GCP and AWS costs are quite the same for the same flavors._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! note

    GCP and AWS costs are quite the same for the same flavors.
```

### The different tags and their associated cost

| Provider | Runner               | Cost ($ per min) |
| -------- | -------------------- | ---------------- |
| GitHub   | `ubuntu-latest`      | 0.008            |
| GitHub   | `ubuntu-18.04`       | 0.008            |
| GitHub   | `ubuntu-20.04`       | 0.008            |
| GitHub   | `ubuntu-22.04`       | 0.008            |
| GitHub   | `ubuntu-20.04-4core` | 0.016            |
| GitHub   | `ubuntu-22.04-4core` | 0.016            |

> | GitHub   | `ubuntu-22.04-8core` | 0.032            |

Reviewer: Those tag are specific to us, we defined them like this, even though github recommend something similar in their doc, check if that's the official name of them.

Author: I just checked the naming, and it is indeed the same. I found that information here: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-github-hosted-runners/about-larger-runners.

Author: I'll add a small note to mention that the name is not specific to GitHub, but it is the recommended naming convention by GitHub.

calculating for the main ones, namely AWS and Google Cloud Provider (GCP).

The cost can be found based on the machine type in the Management Console
for AWS (when creating an EC2 instance) and on the
[Google Cloud website](https://cloud.google.com/compute/vm-instance-pricing)
for GCP.

We aim to obtain a result that is close to reality, within a range of
approximately +/- 5%, for data visualization purposes.
Key points to consider for retrieving cost information:

- RAM and CPU Costs : provided cost per minute for RAM and CPU expenses, can
  be found in the documentation of the respective cloud provider.
- Storage Costs : provided cost per minute for storage expenses, can
  be found in the documentation of the respective cloud provider.
- Bandwidth Cost: Directly determining the cost per minute of bandwidth is
  not feasible.

Calculating the bandwidth cost per minutes is up to the discretion of the
user and will vary depending on the workload. As an example, adding an
extra 30% is what we found by comparing the values in the documentation
of different cloud providers (for CPU, RAM, and storage) with the actual

> values available on our invoices. Using this information, we were able
> to estimate the overall cost using the following formula:
> (all costs are per minute)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
values available on our invoices. Using this information,
estimating the overall cost can be done using the following formula:
(all costs are per minute)
```

[Google Cloud website](https://cloud.google.com/compute/vm-instance-pricing)
for GCP.

We aim to obtain a result that is close to reality, within a range of
approximately +/- 5%, for data visualization purposes.
Key points to consider for retrieving cost information:

> - RAM and CPU Costs : provided values for RAM and CPU expenses, can be found

Reviewer: Be precise, the value is the cost per minute, same story below

  in the Google Cloud documentation.
- Storage Costs : provided values for storage expenses, can be found in the
  Google Cloud documentation.
- Bandwidth Cost: Directly determining the cost of bandwidth is not feasible.

To arrive at an approximate cost, we conducted an analysis of previous invoices
and calculated the additional expenses incurred due to bandwidth, which averaged
around 30% per month. With this information, we were able to approximate the

> overall cost using the following formula:

Reviewer: This sentence is still telling a story in the documentation, here's a quick sample rebranding your sentence:

Calculating the bandwidth cost is up to discretion of the user and will vary depending on the workload. As an example, adding an extra 30% ...

```bash

> cost = (cost_per_flavor + cost_per_storage) * 130 / 100

Reviewer: As the goal is to show a formula, would be good to see the bandwith mentioned as a variable and not a number. 

And review if it would be best to explicit mention that the cost is per minute.

Author: Done.
In my opinion, it is not necessary to specify "(per min)" as it is a formula and all variables have the same metric. In the sense that the formula remains true even if everything is expressed in hours. However, I did end up adding a note above.

```

!!! note

>     GCP and AWS costs are quite the same for the same flavors.

Reviewer: Check if your current syntax is rendering well, if not check if trunk is not complaining with the following:
```suggestion

    GCP and AWS costs are quite the same for the same flavors.
```

If so we might need to tweak some config, I can check on that, let me know.

Author: `trunk` is installed on VSCode and it gives me an error when there's a line break. I will double-check the syntax at the end of the PR!

Reviewer: I created #43, I think those are the config that should help in this scenario, we'll see.

[Google Cloud website](https://cloud.google.com/compute/vm-instance-pricing)
for GCP.

> We aim to obtain a result that is close to reality, within a range of
> approximately +/- 5%, for data visualization purposes.
> Key points to consider for retrieving cost information:

Reviewer: Did a rebrand here, let me know what you think.

```suggestion

Key points to consider for retrieving cost information:

!!! note "Cost for self-hosted runners are approximate"

    When retrieving the cost of each key point,
    calculating the exact cost per minute might not be possible
    as it depends on the cloud provider billing policy
    and each individual CI workload:
    
    - Internal cloud provider/lab with dedicated hardware.
    - Cloud provider billing policy for virtual machines is per hour or day only.
    - Price of instance varies during the day, week or month.
    - CI job that uploads a large amount of data.
```

approximately +/- 5%, for data visualization purposes.
Key points to consider for retrieving cost information:

- RAM and CPU Costs : provided cost per minute for RAM and CPU expenses, can
  be found in the documentation of the respective cloud provider.
- Storage Costs : provided cost per minute for storage expenses, can
  be found in the documentation of the respective cloud provider.
- Bandwidth Cost: Directly determining the cost per minute of bandwidth is
  not feasible.

Calculating the bandwidth cost per minutes is up to the discretion of the
user and will vary depending on the workload. As an example, adding an
extra 30% is what we found by comparing the values in the documentation
of different cloud providers (for CPU, RAM, and storage) with the actual
values available on our invoices. Using this information, we were able
to estimate the overall cost using the following formula:
(all costs are per minute)

```bash

> cost = (cost_per_flavor + cost_per_storage) * cost_of_bandwidth / 100

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cost = (cost_per_flavor + cost_per_storage) * percentage_cost_of_bandwidth
```

```

> <!-- trunk:ignore
> 

Reviewer: Shouldn't be needed. Try #43 first.
```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Conversation solved, but I still see the trunk ignore.

Author: I forgot to push, sorry

!!! note

    GCP and AWS costs are quite the same for the same flavors.

> -->
> 

Reviewer: Shouldn't be needed. Try #43 first.
```suggestion
```

| AWS      | `t3.large`           | 0.0025           |
| GCP      | `n2-standard-4`      | 0.005            |
| GCP      | `n2-standard-8`      | 0.01             |

!!! note

>     Please note that the names of large GitHub hosted runners

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    Please note that the names of large GitHub hosted runners
```

| GCP      | `n2-standard-4`      | 0.005            |
| GCP      | `n2-standard-8`      | 0.01             |

> <!-- trunk:ignore
> 

Reviewer: Shouldn't be needed. Try #43 first.
```suggestion
```

!!! note

    Please note that the names of large GitHub hosted runners
    may not be explicitly the same as shown below, but this is
    the naming convention recommended by GitHub.

> 
> -->

Reviewer: Shouldn't be needed. Try #43 first.
```suggestion
```
